2017's _Heat Signature_ is the second game from Suspicious Developments, after 2013's _Gunpoint_.  It reviewed well on release, but in the intervening years it's quietly built a reputation as an indie gem.

Prior to the release of _Gunpoint_, lead writer and designer Tom Francis was an editor at PC Gamer and a prolific blogger on game design.  Evidently, his first two commercial games distill and embody the design concerns that most interested him throughout his career.

Most of the reviews I've seen for _Heat Signature_ date back to its release, but since then it's received some big balance updates.  The November 2017 [Fair Points Update](https://store.steampowered.com/news/app/268130?updates=true&emclan=103582791453717843&emgid=2910970427675867633) was specifically designed to address early review feedback, and the September 2018 [Space Birthday Update](https://www.pentadact.com/2018-09-27-heat-signatures-space-birthday-update-is-live/) took a further year of learnings and gave us effectively the definitive edition: Suspicious Developments has now moved on from _Heat Signature_ to work on the third game in this so-called “[Defenestration Trilogy](https://store.steampowered.com/curator/34631927)”, so it's unlikely there'll be any further substantial updates.  Now's a great time to take a look at this much-loved game.  Having spent over 50 hours with it, I humbly submit to you my review of _Heat Signature_.

## Gameplay
_Heat Signature_ is, to paraphrase Tom Francis, a game about breaking into spaceships, making terrible mistakes, and thinking of clever ways out of them.  The core loop is this: select a mission, tailor your load-out, fly to, dock with and infiltrate the target vessel, execute your mission, then make it back to base alive.

The game begins with a brief tutorial mission introducing you to basic gameplay mechanics - and only the basics - the narrative premise, and your home base for the early game.  The writing is immediately funny and concise - almost sparse: just enough context to place yourself in the universe.  You're a freedom fighter, see, and you're gonna overthrow the bad guys.  The lurid, technicolor art style is part FTL, part _Hotline Miami_ - callbacks that perhaps aren't accidental.  The soundtrack completes a dystopian picture - by turns dark and anxious, resolute and defiant.  The tutorial gives you a final, indecorous shove toward the mission selection board, and off you go - out on your own into the cold.

### Planning
Missions are presented to you as contracts - counterparty unknown.  They're available in a variety of difficulties, allowing you to control the pacing depending on your equipment and sense of mastery over the game systems.

Basic mission types include heist, rescue, assassination and exfiltration.  The "Mission Details" tab breaks out information on enemy composition and equipment, supporting objectives and key contract conditions.  It may also provide mission-specific hints: your target may try to flee, for example - but not if you disable the teleporter first.  There's also some low-key world-building text.

In the early game, you lack the context to make much sense of this information, but in time it helps you to plan your equipment load-out.  You can take up to 8 items into a mission - a mix of weapons and gadgets.  There are melee and ranged weapons, in both lethal and non-lethal varieties.  Guns may be silenced or not.  They have different spread profiles.  There are grenade launchers.  But it's the gadgets that underpin your tactical effectiveness.  "Crash" gadgets disable electronics, "Glitch" allows you to teleport enemies into harm's way - or better yet, out into space.  "Sidewinder" lets you traverse open areas without being seen.  There are others.

As you have no advance knowledge of the layout of each vessel, or the placement of enemies inside it, tactical optionality is at a premium.  This incentivises you to carry a diverse range of gadgets.  If you have enough currency - known as 'Acid' - you can purchase some of these in advance.  But in the early game, you'll just be taking in whatever you happen to have and finding additional equipment in the field.

Forewarned and forearmed, it's time to begin the infiltration.

### Infiltration
The Breacher Pod is your primary means of conveyance and your gateway to illicit ship interiors.  Undocking from home base, you jet across the star map to intercept your target - the direction of which is indicated by this chevron - using the left and right mouse buttons for accelerating and velocity matching, respectively.  Getting the hang of approaching, speed matching and docking your Breacher Pod to the the target vessel - which may at the time be changing direction under power - can be tricky.

At first I thought this a sort of tacked-on mini-game between the meatier planning and infiltration stages.  But your Breacher Pod is a tool every bit as useful and flexible as anything else in your arsenal.  You can remotely pilot it to come get you if you're mistakenly ejected into space.  You can commandeer third party ships, use their weapons to peel modules off your target, then dock with the gaping holes left behind for creative access to otherwise difficult-to-reach areas.  

Once inside, the infiltration begins.  Movement is with the WASD keys and your character faces in the direction of your mouse - that's important because some gadgets - the stealth shield, for example - are directional.  You can pause the action with the space bar.  Hold the "shift" key and you can pan around with your mouse and observe the layout - points of interest such as locked doors, explosives, the bridge, and enemy locations.  There's no fog of war, so everything is visible.  You'll be able to visually confirm the mission details you read prior to leaving base.

Hovering over an enemy in pause mode reveals additional information: their weapon, any armor or shields, and key cards.  Area-effect conditions are also overlaid, showing you the range of Faraday Cage-like electronics jammers, impenetrable Defender shields and heat sensors, amongst others.  If you've got a firearm equipped, you'll also see overlaid the range within which the guards will hear your shots.  Keeping in mind what they say about plans, it's at this point you can start to sketch out a route to your goal.  As long as you stay on your Breacher Pod, or in the airlock it's attached to, you're safe.  Unpausing will allow you to observe enemy behaviour and patrol routes.

Ship interiors are generated procedurally.  Tom Francis has blogged [at some length](https://www.pentadact.com/2015-11-26-laying-out-heat-signatures-ships-snakey-vs-branchy/) on how the algorithm works.  Generally speaking, the layout puts your goal far away from your docking point, forcing you to traverse most of the level through a range of enemy encounters and locked doors.

Ship designs aren't really regular, cohesive and believable in a way that evokes real places.  But I'm not sure they need to be: as play-spaces - spaces to facilitate encounter design - they're entirely successful.  I'm also struck by how difficult it must've been to engineer an algorithm capable of procedurally generating these spaces, along with enemy and item placement, such that no required key or item is soft-locked out of reach.

What's less successful is the legibility of the art style.  It's hard to know what's a raised wall providing concealment and protection, and what's a feature that enemies can see through or over.  The clutter can also obscure other vital details such as enemy status effects and the location of items on the floor.

Absent the perspective of an isometric 2D or 3D camera, the only information you have to tell obstacles from open space is the textures themselves.  There's a "collision sensor" on hand in the pause menu that highlights traversable space, but it's a kludge - one that shouldn't be necessary.  It made me think about the tradition of top-down roguelikes with clean tile art.  As a player, maybe you don't consciously think about legibility when you look at the tile art of something like CDDA or Caves of Qud, but you'll notice its absence right away.  The issue's compounded by how far the camera needs to be pulled back to make sense of your surroundings.  Awareness of enemy positioning is key in _Heat Signature_, so you'll play much of it zoomed out.

The legibility issue was covered at some length in reviews around the game's launch in 2017, but kudos to Suspicious Developments because in November 2017 they introduced the [Fair Points Update]((https://store.steampowered.com/news/app/268130?updates=true&emclan=103582791453717843&emgid=2910970427675867633), one feature of which was a new "Simple Art" accessibility mode that makes "traversable space almost entirely blank".  Would it have been better if the original art style traded clutter for clarity?  Yeah, but as a good faith attempt to meet players and critics half way, you have to respect the introduction of this mode just two months post-launch.  The trade-off with this feature is that the game quickly becomes visually monotonous.  

Ultimately I decided to muddle through with the original art style, making use of the collision sensor where necessary.  That helps in situations where you already suspect the textures may not be telling the whole story, but does nothing when there's no such indication.

So, you know where you're going - how do you get there?  Until they've seen you - or heard you shoot a weapon - guards stay in one area, or patrol, either alone or with a buddy or two.  Simply walking around won't generate enough sound to draw their attention, so unless they're facing in your direction, you're golden.  You can avoid some encounters by sneaking past unseen, but eventually you're gonna have to fight.

Combat involves killing or incapacitating your enemies before they have a chance to take you down or raise an alarm.  The unpaused game progresses quite quickly, and taking any action unpauses the game, so the rhythm of combat is act, pause, act, pause.  There's no getting around it: there are lots of different ways to kill people in _Heat Signature_.  The loosely sketched story of resistance fighters liberating the galaxy, and the cheerful, polychromatic art style is a bit dissonant with jumping into your first mission and being asked to immediately stab a bunch of people to death with a sword.  Resistance or no, there's no strong narrative reason established up front for cold-blooded killing.  That might not bother you - I found it tonally jarring.  Non-lethal "pacifist" missions come later but characters often start with just a lethal bladed weapon.

Tom has written on a number of occasions about what he calls the “killing decision” in games - whether to kill or merely incapacitate your opponent, when given the choice.  In his writings, I understood him to be saying that non-lethal options should carry a cost - something that makes them unappealing versus outright killing - something that you have to weigh in the balance.  But _Heat Signature_ doesn’t really seem to play around with that: there’s no appreciable cost to non-lethal takedowns.  Perhaps unconscious guards could simply wake up at some point, driving home that you were paying a price for your kindness.

Weapons and items feel well designed and suitably sci-fi.  There's a rock-paper-scissors quality to the way they interact with enemy load-outs and tactics, but I don't want to sell them short: they do an excellent job at enabling some fiendishly complex and surprising tactics.  Balance overall is fine although a couple of items felt distinctly overpowered - most notably for me was a device that slows time for 10 seconds, up to 5 times per insertion, and is automatically recharged upon returning to base.

You can hold one item in each hand - activated with the left and right mouse button respectively.  In the beginning, you have few consumables, so your load-outs might consist of a melee weapon in one hand, ranged weapon in the other.  You can melee slightly around corners which gives you latitude to take out enemies before they spot you.

Swapping out something in either hand for one of the six other items in your inventory is instantaneous.  You'll commonly find yourself using one item, pausing, swapping it out while it cools down, using something else, then pausing again and swapping it back in when it's ready.  For this reason, which items happen to be assigned to your mouse buttons at any given time feels arbitrary - it doesn't affect your tactical options.  Weapons and items have a cooldown, but I wondered whether a small additional time penalty should have applied to item switching, forcing you to make some hard decisions.  In the absence of such a penalty, eight items might be too many.  I don't know why this was the number, but often I found myself wishing for a mode that restricted you to six or fewer items instead - much like the rarer Defector missions, which I'll get to in a bit.

This issue's compounded by the ability to teleport into your inventory any items that happen to be lying around on the ground - from incapacitated guards, for example.  You'll have to make space in your inventory to do so, but this is zero cost, since anything you drop can later be teleported back to your inventory.  Also of great use in encounters - and something that should've been mentioned in the tutorial - is that the "t" key allows you to throw the weapon currently in your hand.  This effectively gives each weapon two uses before the cooldown is triggered: once when you're firing or swinging it, and a second time when you throw it - provided you don't need to fire it again - at least until you've had a chance to teleport it back to your inventory.  Given level and room sizes and enemy placement and patrols, you'll spend a large part of the game engaging four or fewer enemies at once, so the addition of the ability to throw weapons has an outsize effect on your effectiveness - especially in the early game.  A weapon in each hand, each used once and then thrown, gives you a lot of options - too many, I think - without asking much of you.  Inventory management is only one aspect of the game's item economy, but there's already a theme emerging that it might be too generous.

So those are the basics.  Stay hidden until it's time to fight.  Don't get shot.  Use all of your equipment.  But the interaction of cramped 2D spaces, hostile agents, a plethora of tactical options and realtime with pause gives rise to a hugely creative and entertaining core loop.  As the game progresses, you'll spend less time cutting people down with swords or shooting them from across the room, and more time thinking up creative ways to strip entire squads of their armor, or teleport them out into the vacuum of space.  The results are frequently hilarious.  Key to these more complex tactics is learning the different ways in which your various items can be chained together, and how best to use and place them within a given environment.

As complexity and challenge ramps up, so too do the opportunities for encounters to spiral completely out of control.  To get the most out of _Heat Signature_, you need to move past the fear of failure and embrace the chaos - indeed, become its agent - and marvel in what you can make from it. It's here that the game really shines.  It’s an engine for systematically sublimating failure into narratively interesting anecdotes.  There's a deep satisfaction as a player in stringing together a sequence of planned and unplanned encounters into an abject mess, then managing to extract yourself.  It makes you feel smart.  At its best, _Heat Signature_ keeps you vibrating in this emotive loop between dismay and joy.  Ship layouts, encounter designs, and even the overall snappy pacing are in service of this.  The amount of downtime outside this core emotional loop is minimised - you spend the majority of your playtime in the thick of it.

There's an interesting relationship with difficulty, too - harder missions tend to generate the most interesting anecdotes: partly by simple inflation of the number of permutations of amusing failure states, and partly because the application of skill naturally builds your investment as a player.  But more than that: Heat Signature actively encourages players to engage in experimentation by providing what Tom Francis refers to as a wide "failure spectrum" - ample opportunity to transform failure into success. In gaming, we usually expect failure to be punished.  Without punishment, there are no stakes.  _Dark Souls_ famously gives you just one chance to recover your hard-won souls before they're lost for good.  Even my four-year old knows that Survival mode is more engaging than Creative mode in Minecraft.

As players we want to feel the _consequences_ of our actions - good and bad.  There's no emotional texture to the experience otherwise.  But we also generally don't want failure to be the end of the story.  What's really compelling is when failure raises the stakes, but doesn't foreclose the outcome.  Tom Francis has written extensively on this point in the context of Metal Gear Solid 5 - I've included links in the show notes.  In his own words:

> “Moving to these messier states creates stories of panic and improvisation, instead of frustrating game-overs… A big failure spectrum is good because a lot of the most emotional moments in a game happen on the cusp of failure. If you were _this_ close to being seen, your escape is exhilarating. But if failure is a ‘game over’ screen, spending a lot of time on the cusp of failure means a lot of ‘game over’ screens. Each one interrupts your immersion and ends your investment in this current run. It pulls you out of the game, and you find yourself in a menu, then at a checkpoint or a savegame.“ - Tom Francis

So, by Tom's own words, we know that a broad failure spectrum is one of _Heat Signature_'s core design principles.  But how does this specifically manifest in the game's systems?  And does it work - is it any good?

There's no doubt that it creates a lot of space for experimentation.

Let's take that most fundamental of gaming failures - dying.  Getting shot usually doesn't kill you outright in _Heat Signature_ - you'll be knocked unconscious, carried to the nearest airlock and flushed out into space, where you'll have an opportunity to remote-pilot your Breacher pod to come pick you up.  Each character can do this only so many times before dying, though - you're on a one-way fixed timer that runs down while you're in the cold vacuum of space; if you can pick yourself up quickly, you'll get away with this a number of times, and certain mid-game items can further improve your odds.  In this way, players aren't punished with the immediate loss of their character.  Sure, you can make death less of a punishment through any number of means - increasing player hit-points, decreasing enemy damage, et cetera.  But this knockout mechanic is a more elegant way of handling it in a manner that's consistent with both the narrative and setting.

I think you can see the influence of the "failure spectrum" in AI design, too.  Some of the post-release criticism of _Heat Signature_ was focused on its enemy AI - some felt it was too easily exploitable: kiting was a viable strategy that would let you pick off guards one-by-one, undermining the careful composition of enemy groups, with their complementary skillsets and load-outs.

I haven't played those earlier builds of the game, but the September 2018 “[Space Birthday](https://store.steampowered.com/news/app/268130/view/2910970427675866361)” update - released almost a year after those first reviews - made substantial changes to AI behaviour - some specifically designed to reduce the viability of cheesing.  First up, there's a new buddy system - guards leaving a cluster to venture out on patrol tend to travel in pairs and watch each others' backs.  Also cool, I think, is the way that stationary guards start to get antsy if their buddies on regular patrol don't show up on time.  There's also a new "Lifelink" guard buff on some of the harder missions - guards are connected in networks and taking out any single guard instantly alerts all others in that network.  Guards are also now more likely to vary their patrol patterns unpredictably based on the presence of key rooms and loot.

These changes were successful enough that those early review criticisms didn't make sense to me as someone coming to the game in 2021.  It's crazy how small changes like these can have such a big positive impact.  One of the great ongoing disappointments with the otherwise fantastic _Stalker_ games for me has been the uselessness of foliage.  From a gameplay perspective - and without minimising the engineering challenges of achieving this in a fully open 3D world - providing for the creative use of cover in a first-person shooter is low-hanging fruit because doing it properly has such a large impact on immersion, and because it makes players feel smart.  I don't care how good _Stalker 2_ looks in Unreal Engine 5, if that game is functionally the same as the original Stalker games but has working lines of sight I will play it till I drop.

It's also interesting to me that the way these cheesing strategies were addressed was by adding new discrete, self-contained AI behaviours specifically designed to counter them - including the conceit of the new Lifelink - rather than wholesale re-writes to the AI.  I think this speaks to the confidence of vision for this game.  Cheesing strategies can be "effective" - in the sense that they allow you to progress - but they also tend to undermine player enjoyment by substituting mundane problems for more interesting ones.  The AI changes made in the Space Birthday update nudge the player back towards more interesting problems.

I think there's an interesting comparison with the immersive sim genre here, too.  I've seen _Heat Signature_ called an immersive sim in more than one place, and yeah - there are wide-open spaces to traverse, special abilities, enemies to evade and take down.  But where _Dishonored_ or _Thief_ is primarily concerned with the simulation - the complexity of planning and moving through 3D space, frequently with only a vague sense of where enemies and objectives might be - _Heat Signature_ intentionally abstracts those concerns away behind its top-down 2D perspective, realtime pause, and full map awareness.  The game is primarily concerned with presenting the player with legible - although sometimes fiendishly complex - puzzles, rather than with convincingly recreating an immersive simulation.

Enemy behaviours, too, make a lot more sense in this context.  Why don't enemies take cover?  Why don't they flank?  Why don't they keep moving to make themselves harder to hit?  I think it's telling that none of these behaviours were added in the 2018 AI update.  It may be tempting to say: this is an indie game, constructed with limited funding, and these sorts of combat behaviours can be notoriously difficult to get right - although arguably the 2D perspective would help here.  But knowing what we do about the design goals for this game, I'd say it's more likely these omissions are intentional. 

For me, _Heat Signature_'s biggest balance problem is in the item economy.  Despite each having their own character-specific buffs and a unique "personal mission", characters ultimately feel largely disposable and interchangeable.  If they die on-mission, you lose them and all their equipment permanently.  The state of the galaxy and your tech unlocks is preserved, though, and a replacement character immediately slides up on a stool in the bar at home base, ready to continue the fight.  So far, so roguelike.

But between the preponderance of in-mission loot, the generous credit rewards for completing missions, and the "send to stash" mechanic for loot that doesn't fit in one of your 8 in-mission gear slots, gearing up new characters is trivial - indeed, you quickly end up with more gear than you know what to do with - so much so that it doesn't make sense to horde - go crazy, live it up - there's always more gear. 

You can achieve a great deal with a fresh character, particularly because familiarity with the game's systems tends to be more important than your gear, per se.  Your best weapon is the ability to think on your feet.  I can see why this approach was taken; _Heat Signature_ is most interested in being a battle of wits, and keen to get you back in the saddle as soon as possible.  But the net result of these design decisions collectively is that the death of a character is more of a speed bump than a real setback.  It doesn't even really rise to the level of a mild inconvenience - and so the stakes on any given mission don't feel that high.

Over my 50 hour playtime, the sense of a lack of meaningful jeopardy has come to define _Heat Signature_ for me personally.  This is a setting, and an art style, and an idea that should be right up my alley, and yet now, as I'm about to put the game down, I sort of wish above all that it had dared to kick sand in my face.

A word about Defector missions: in addition to the variety of basic mission types introduced to you at the beginning of the game, _Heat Signature_ isn't afraid to play with the formula in more substantive ways.  I want to talk about the so-called Defector mission type in particular - although there are others - both because they're great, and because the differences say interesting things about the design of the standard missions.

As you play, you'll liberate space stations - which is incidentally how you unlock new tech tree items.  Each liberated station has its own "Defector" mission: challenging special scenarios that give you a one-off character with its own gear set - you can't take in any of your own gear.  By arming you with a specific restricted gearset, Defector missions push you to change up your tactics.  You're forced to improvise in a way that promotes learning and helps you develop a deeper understanding of the game's systems.

By giving you a one-off character for the mission, a restricted gearset, and allowing you to replay it as many times as you like with no consequences, the Defector missions serve to break up _Heat Signature_'s pacing and to keep forcing an evolution of your own perspective on what's possible.  In one mission you're asked to propel yourself through the vacuum of space using nothing but a shotgun - something that players might be unlikely to discover left to their own devices.  The goal is to encourage lateral, out-of-the-box thinking, and in this regard Defector missions are a raging success.  They also blunt another common criticism of the early game, which is that there is very little in the way of a tutorial.

## Conclusion
It's a truism to say that constraints produce better art.  Funding, experience, manpower - all of these are often in short supply in indie dev.  Sometimes we roll those reasons out as an explanation for why something doesn't reach the standards we might have hoped: they're a small studio, they're inexperienced, they did it on a shoestring.

But tellingly, we're at the end of the review and I haven't even mentioned that _Heat Signature_ is essentially the work of two guys - John Roberts as artist and Tom Francis, who has no formal computer science background but did pretty much everything else - concept, design and all the work in Game Maker Studio.  He was a guy that reviewed games, then one day decided to be a guy that made games.

They say critics make poor artists but in this case, I don’t think so.  You can see Tom developing his vision through his 10-year career as a writer.  Video diaries and blogs in indie dev are more common than they used to be, but it's still rare to have such a clear window into the evolving interests and concerns of a future developer.  _Heat Signature_ is an attempt at manifesting those convictions into a game, and it's a cracker.