<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/80wVc5KbaBc" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This is a transcript of a video review. Click here to watch.

S.T.A.L.K.E.R.: Anomaly is a sandbox-style full conversion mod for 2009's S.T.A.L.K.E.R.: Call of Pripyat.  It takes the maps from all three S.T.A.L.K.E.R. (from here on, for your reading pleasure, just _Stalker_) games and stitches them together into a single playable world map - although separated by loading screens.  It makes wholesale changes to the economy and crafting systems and adds a more hardcore survival experience, new main storylines and sidequests, and a huge number of customisation options.

Stalker: Anomaly is provided as a complete re-pack, for free.  You don't need the original Call of Pripyat to play it.  I'm reviewing Stalker: Anomaly as an outsider; someone who has put around 140 hours into Stalker: Call of Pripyat and this mod, combined. I'm not a hard-core Stalker fan from way back - in fact, I completely missed those games when they came out, starting with 2007's Stalker: Shadow of Chernobyl.  I want to disclose that up front, because true fans of the series spend hundreds or even thousands of hours with these games and understand them and enjoy them in ways that it's very difficult or impossible for outsiders coming into the franchise to do.

I think an outsider's perspective has value, though - particularly if you're someone who's never experienced the Stalker franchise but are curious.

## Technical points

Just a heads up: I've stuck to early game footage for the most part, in order to minimise spoilers, and I won't be talking about specific plot points.  That said, I will be showing various locations and gameplay scenarios throughout the review.  
The Stalker modding community is large and vibrant.  Stalker: Anomaly is clearly a passion project.  The devs obviously loved what they experienced in the original Stalker games, grew tired of waiting for a sequel - official or spiritual - and set out to make the Stalker game _they_ wanted to play.  As the official wiki puts it, this mod "aims to be the most stable and customizable experience for fans of the S.T.A.L.K.E.R. games." 

The original Stalker games are known for being pretty janky from a technical standpoint.  In particular, stuttering and frame pacing issues are common. Stalker: Anomaly improves on the technical aspects of the original engine in a number of ways and is immediately a smoother, more stable experience than any of the original un-modded games.  It isn't perfect, however, the consensus being that there's just a limit to what can be done with an engine that dates in large part back to the original Shadow of Chernobyl.

I initially played Stalker: Anomaly in its un-modded state but shoutout to Churchy for his excellent Let's Play video detailing a small but superb selection of mods that unequivocally improve the way the game looks, largely without touching what makes the core experience special.  I'll link that video below, along with the exact list of mods I ended up using for my playthrough.

I played this on a Ryzen 3700X with an Nvidia 3060ti in DX11 mode and found that very often performance seemed to be CPU-bound at higher resolutions.  One change that seems to work wonders for a number of people with diverse builds is to lower grass height, density and render distance.

## Setting, Aesthetics

Most of the Stalker full-conversion mods put their own aesthetic spin on the Stalker experience.  That said, stylistically, Stalker: Anomaly in stock form sticks pretty close to the original Call of Pripyat.  Visually it sometimes reminds me of a Source Engine game - Half Life or Left 4 Dead: neat, sharp lines and nicely detailed texture work for the time - but less-than-convincing ambient occlusion leading to objects and character models that kind of don't appear to be "grounded" in the world.

On the other hand, the lighting is a step up over the original games, with crepuscular "god" rays in particular producing some lovely sunsets.  All in all, for me this aspect of the game is very successful, for what it is.  Stalker: Anomaly preserves the essential art direction of the original Stalker series while filing away some of its rougher edges to leave you with a presentation that's partly nostalgic, but also quite cohesive visually.

But it's hard to shake the feeling that there's kind of a weird emptiness to this place.  Part of this comes down to the game's economy, I think - loot is quite rare and it's not unusual to clear an entire floor or even building without finding anything.  But there's an absence of people, too, and perhaps on the default settings even mutants are too few and far between.  You feel it perhaps more than you did in Call of Pripyat.  While the world of Stalker was always sparsely populated, in Call of Pripyat the narrative kind of ties your experiences of different places together.

In Stalker: Anomaly, on the other hand, perhaps the sandbox design aspirations are at odds with that sort of narrative structure.  I get that, and I respect that Stalker: Anomaly leans in to the scavenging, survival and looting aspects.  But I think there's a fine line between an eerily deserted post-apocalyptic hellscape, and just a bunch of empty buildings.  Visually, the imposing 1970s Soviet architecture promises a certain kind of experience, but I lost track of the number of times I came through such places with a few rounds of old ammunition, a pair of boots and memories of empty, quiet rooms.  This is compounded by a sense that most of the NPC questlines that are off the beaten path of the main story amount to various flavours of fetch quests.  So while you might be tempted to strike out on your own, at least in the early game you'll probably have a better time if you stick to the core narrative experience.  I felt like surprisingly the unfettered exploration aspect of the mod ended up being one of its weakest parts.

But wow, those environments.  They really do drip with atmosphere.  It's easy to forget but at the time the original Call of Pripyat debuted, this was a pretty unique experience.  It's hard to overstate just how much of an influence these places designed by GSC Game World have had on gaming in the intervening years. Everything from Day Z to PUBG to Escape from Tarkov to - of course - the Metro series, owes these games - this game world - a debt of inspiration.  And these locations absolutely continue to stand should-to-shoulder with any of the best appearing in much newer games with bigger budgets.  And Stalker: Anomaly brings all of those locations together into one playable map.  It's a lot, it's a real achievement on the part of both the original devs and the modding community. It's worth stating unequivocally: the game world alone is worth the price of admission and in many ways I think it's the world that keeps drawing in new generations of gamers year after year. 

A quick note on sound design: a lot of the environmental sound work for this mod is great - it does a superb job of creating atmosphere.  There is one exception, though, and that's the "fake" ambient mutant sounds, which instead of providing useful information to the player, confuse them.  Soon after I started playing I discovered the Soundscape Overhaul mod, which addresses (amongst other things) exactly this issue.  Even if you elect not to install any of the other visual or gameplay mods I've linked above, I'd recommend that you install that one.

## Economy and Crafting

Fans refer to this mod as a hard-core Stalker experience, and I think that has a very specific meaning: it's referring to the economy and - especially - the crafting systems.  For beginners in particular - either those who are completely new to the Stalker universe or those who are simply new to this mod - the opaque and inscrutable economy and crafting systems are an almost vertical difficulty spike that serves to gate off a lot of the other great experiences the mod has to offer.  I completely understand why it was done this way. Stalker: Anomaly is supposed to be an experience for Stalker enthusiasts that have already demolished the original games. But it's just something you need to be aware of before deciding whether this is for you.  For new players, putting the time in to understand the game's economy and crafting systems as early as possible will be key to your enjoyment.  In particular, get a grasp on what essential items - especially tools - you need to carry around with you at all times.  After you settle on a decent early-game weapon and armor loadout, you need to get into the habit of breaking down loot for its parts rather than carrying around whole pieces of equipment.  In principle you won't be able to sell looted guns and armor given their abysmal condition, so farming and selling loot isn't an efficient way to make bank early on.  And unlike the original games, looting artifacts will remain impractical much of the early game.  Stick to quests.  

You'll also need to get across the stash system as weight limits are quite low and you'll find it tough to get organised otherwise.  Once you realise you need multiple stashes, you're likely to be inclined to keep them all together in one convenient location that also includes traders, engineers, etc., so try to settle on an early-game base for that purpose - as a free Stalker, Rostok is a good choice.  Once you've got those essentials down, you can make a start on learning about crafting and repairing.  Just be prepared for lots of experimentation and a learning curve that remains steep for quite a while yet.  In my view - and I don't seem to be alone in this - the crafting and repairing systems probably step over the "realism" line and into the realm of annoying.  Some may really love these systems - and don't let me pre-judge them for you - but for me this is probably the least successful part of the Stalker Anomaly mod.  It's just too finicky and for me personally wasn't a successful gameplay loop - it didn't draw me in and keep me engaged.  I continue to bounce off it and favour just paying mechanics' exorbitant prices to both upgrade and maintain my gear.  At least we have that option - just be prepared to pay for it.

## AI 

When it comes to enemy AI, I respect what's been achieved here enormously.  Call of Pripyat is an older game and a game that remains - even many years on - fundamentally buggy.  The team of modders that built Stalker: Anomaly no doubt have limited resources and the mod is released for nothing.

Stalker: Anomaly really hits its stride when you're moving through its magnificent broken environments, engaging with the hostile mutants and humans that live there.  Those are the experiences that create the big moments of surprise, fear, excitement - and crushing disappointment.  On account of the fantastic world building and mutant designs, they're often telegenic experiences, too, and they're the ones you frequently see on YouTube.  But scratch the surface and it doesn't take much to reveal some fundamentally broken AI that will do its best to undermine your enjoyment.

When some of your core gameplay loops turn so heavily on the quality of your AI, any cracks are going to be visible pretty quickly.  Ultimately this game's AI is both a standout achievement and also its biggest disappointment.  You can see the greatness there just out of reach, but you can also see that the issues are too fundamental to overcome and manifest as very obvious shortcomings in the core gameplay loops.  And, unlike some other frustrating aspects of the game, it's not something you can solve with a few tweaks to the extensive configuration options.

## Stealth

I'd say this is a game of two halves: detection and combat.  Once you get into combat the AI is reasonably convincing, but everything prior to that is problematic.  The three original games actually took slightly varying approaches to stealth, and for Call of Pripyat - on which Anomaly is based - it's some point of contention whether there's any working stealth system in the game at all.  In the beginning, you may feel as though there's no legibility at all as to the way stealth works, but as best I can tell, Anomaly carries Pripyat's baggage.  There's kind of a "line of sight" system in play: if there's an unbroken line of sight - or a line of sight broken only by foliage - between you and an enemy, regardless of the distance and lighting conditions or whether or not you're making sound or moving, you're almost certain to be detected.  Combined with the ability of human enemies to apparently see (and shoot) straight through foliage, this makes an outdoor stealth approach all but impossible.  Or, at least, you might occasionally do it by sheer luck, but you won't be able to do it by skill.  This is not Dishonored in the Soviet Ukraine.

Legibility issues continue with the way sound works.  On the one hand, minimising the amount of sound you make seems to have no effect on how easily detected you are.  On the other hand, on a number of occasions enemies would completely fail to notice proximate gunfire.  

You may well say, "that's not the way it's supposed to be played".  But to give the player all this darkness, all these shadows, and then to not let them make use of that - at the very minimum that's a confusing legibility issue for players.  And it's arguably at odds with the design goals of a "sandbox", which should be to let the player experience and experiment with the world the way that feels right for them.  Or you may well say, don't judge the AI by its bugs.  But what's the distinction between a bug, and generally buggy AI?  Is it in the frequency and severity of bugs? Because the sorts of experiences I'm showing you here weren't cherry-picked - they're pretty representative of my day-to-day experience with Anomaly.

## Combat 

Once you're into an actual fight, AI performance picks up.  Enemies will usually - but not always - move quickly to cover and they're unlikely to poke their head out from the same location twice.  They're excellent shots (especially if you enable the "hard core aim" option, which I recommend) and seem to have a pretty good sense for when they've got you pinned down.  They're also capable of flanking.  When everything goes right, combat is exhilarating and convincing.  But just as often, for reasons that aren't completely clear, you'll find yourself clearing a room of mercs that basically just stand there waiting for you to lean around the corner and shoot them from cover.  They shoot back, but they don't seem to move around or look for cover.  On balance I've had better engagements outdoors than indoors.  AI issues are also compounded with occasionally dodgy hit boxes - sometimes your shots won't penetrate an invisible object directly in front of your gun, other times an enemy will be invulnerable while concealed behind something similar.  When you think of "jank", perhaps you think of the visual stuff: models clipping, textures popping in - that kind of thing.  But in the Stalker series it runs deeper. Depending on your luck, you might have an amazing experience one moment, and a downright confusing one the next.  

The problem this creates is one of unfairness.  If you work your ass off to quietly infiltrate an enemy base, only to be killed by a sniper from across the map who shoots you through a tree, you're going to feel that's an unfair outcome.  Stalker doesn't just stray into this territory occasionally - it lives there.  You have to make your peace with that if you want to enjoy the other things the game has to offer.  This also complicates the way you approach the difficulty settings.  Ramping up difficulty to raise the challenge simply shrinks the margin of error, further emphasising the problem.  Being able to reload around this sort of is helpful, but playing on permadeath is a recipe for disappointment. Imagine getting ten or twenty hours into a playthrough and then losing it all in circumstances you know to be unfair.  That's going to strongly influence how you feel about the game. That's a real shame, because there's a reasonable argument that permadeath is absolutely the right way to play a sandbox like this.  It's a mode I was very interested in until I came to grips with the game's shortcomings.

## Conclusion

For all it's faults, though, there's definitely something compelling in the moment to moment gameplay of exploring, sneaking, fighting and looting your way about the Zone - no doubt about it.  Yes, that sense of immersion is frequently undermined by the limitations of the gameplay systems - most notably the AI.  But if you do push though those immersion-breaking moments - especially when you're still new to the game - if you give the game a break for its age and for what a remarkable achievement it is, and you play it accepting of its faults - it's remarkable how quickly you can sink comfortably back into the core gameplay loop. That's a triumph of atmosphere over substance. 

The combination of scripted narrative and the exploration and fighting loops, generates interesting anecdotes.  It arguably lacks the compelling human elements that make for truly great stories, though.  Even NPCs with whom you have regular contact are mostly furniture, and there's little in the way of compelling character development.  Overall for me the writing was probably less successful than Call of Pripyat itself - but that might be to give those original games too much credit.

But I want to get back to that moment-to-moment gameplay loop, because there's something compelling here and it's worth experiencing. If you enjoy - or can get past - the economy, the pedantically detailed crafting system, and the jank, then at least once in your gaming career, you should drop in to the Zone and experience Anomaly.