There are a few different ways to sculpt nice voxel art curves and curved surfaces.  At its core, this is a problem best approached with the normal tools of hard surface modeling.  But there are some curve-balls to be aware of when working with voxels.

First thing to consider is how resolution affects the quality of your curves.  If you're going for a mid- to low-resolution art style, you might nevertheless be considering sculpting in higher res to achieve nicer curves and surfaces, then re-voxelizing down to your target resolution.  In Voxel Max, you can achieve this by right-clicking on the mesh in the outliner, scaling down under `Object Properties`, right-clicking on the mesh again, then selecting `Voxelize`.  The problem with this is that re-voxelizing _down_ to a lower-res model has some footguns.  You can help yourself by using power of 2 increments - 0.5 might be a good place to start in this example - but, depending on the complexity of the model, you may lose detail you want to preserve.  I try to avoid re-voxelizing down (it works much better when scaling up).

Next is the question of how to actually create your curves and surfaces.  In Voxel Max, when drawing with the line tool, you can add arbitrary control points using the backtick key (\`).  This is analogous to creating a bezier curve.  When the curve is complete, you can modify the control points by hitting `r` (`Move Last Edit`), selecting any control point (or all control points, if you'd like to clone-move the geometry for use in multiple places), and manipulating it using the viewport gizmo (which, as of beta 578, now supports rotation).  This workflow will also work with the free hand tool, although I found the line tool a better fit for creating curves.  To turn the curve into a surface, switch to face mode (`f`) and extrude.

This is a good way to produce 2D curves and surfaces that are curved in two dimensions.  It is also an essential technique in the creation of your own custom sets of boolean tools.  On the other hand, on its own it is not really a convenient way to create surfaces curved in three dimensions.  For that, you can consider using boolean operations - common in any hard-surface workflow.  Voxel Max implements boolean union, subtract and - as of beta 580 - intersection.  

See [[Boolean operations fundamentals]], [[Sculpting from reference images with Combine - Intersect]] and [[Sculpting details with booleans and the Combine tool]] for more information.

_Last update: 16 Jan 2023_