One of Voxel Max's strengths is the interface consistency between the iPad/iOS versions and the Mac version.  This is by design, but also partly thanks to it being a Catalyst app.  Using Voxel Max regularly on both platforms made me think about the challenges of keeping the user experience consistent when dealing with two different user input paradigms: touch and Apple Pen (essential for modeling on the go) on the one hand, versus mouse (or trackpad, or stylus) and keyboard on the other.

Camera controls in 3D modeling software such as Voxel Max is one area where a two-handed touch and pen paradigm feels very natural.  Pen in one hand for modeling, one and two-finger swipe, plus pinch, with the other hand for camera orbit around the selected object, pan and zoom, respectively.  It's instantly intuitive, granular and fast - the sort of gold-standard workflow that just gets out of your way.

Working on a Mac with more traditional inputs, the experience is also great - once you learn how to get around.  If you're new to modeling, it lacks the intuitiveness of the touch interface.  That's an inherent limitation of using a mouse and keyboard, not a criticism of this - or any other - modeling software.  Right click and drag to orbit the selected object, middle click (or, my preference, CMD + right click) to pan, mouse wheel to zoom.  Having easy access to keyboard hotkeys on your free hand can make some workflows even faster than on iPad.  Mac is, in fact, my preferred platform.

However, there's one particular thing I often find myself wanting to do when modeling - especially against reference images, using the orthographic camera: quickly snap to an arbitrary (up, down, front/back, left/right) 90 degree angle to the mesh - usually in order to sculpt "through" the mesh using Voxel Max's `stretch` and `mirror` tools.  On iPad, you can do this by tapping a visible face or edge of the scene cube (the RGB-colored cube at the top of the interface).  This will snap the camera to 90 degree (face) and 45 degree (edge) angles to the selected object.  I find this is best done with the Pen.  At present, though, doing so will reset your viewport pan to the object origin, and - in the case of the top or bottom view - rotation around the Z-axis, which might not always be what you want.  In future, these may be separate controls.  For now, if you're using the scene cube to lock to an axis, you'll need to manually reset your pan and (when snapping to the top or bottom face) Z-axis rotation with your free hand.

By contrast, as of the latest beta 572 build of version 1.5.4, the Mac version helpfully leverages the CMD key as a modifier to separate these operations.  If you just left click on a face or edge of the scene cube, the camera will be locked to the relevant axis and pan and Z-axis rotation reset.  But if you hold CMD then click, you'll get the desired axis lock without resetting panning or losing all of your current Z-axis rotation.  The latter will be snapped to the nearest 45 degree increment, though, and roll will be removed.[^1] In practice I don't find this to be a problem - unlike losing panning and rotation around the Z-axis entirely, the concessions aren't disorienting.

_Last update: 16 Jan 2023_

[^1]:  A concession to managing gimbal lock arising from using quaternions for camera movement, but Euler angles for the snap points.