See [[Preparing Voxel Max models for use in 3D game engines]] for a complete checklist to follow when modeling in, and exporting from, Voxel Max for use in 3D game engines.

Using voxel art models such as those prepared in either Voxel Max or MagicaVoxel for static meshes in a 3D game engine is usually fairly straightforward.  All such exported meshes need to go through a preparatory stage in your DCC.  This cleaning process takes naively-exported geometry from your voxel editor (meaning: geometry that when translated into the DCC, looks similar to the voxel blocks you see in your voxel editor - including all of the internal geometry, and without removing multiple vertices sharing the same space) and naively processes it, optimising for reduction in triangle count, correct normal orientation and for ensuring there is no non-manifold geometry.  There are usually plugins or addons for your DCC to help with this.

The drawback of this naive export -> naive processing approach when it comes to skeletal meshes, though, is that it cannot ensure that there are sufficient vertices available for clean deformation, where you need them.  It has no means of knowing where you intend to deform the model.  Some hacky workarounds exist - such as observing separation of model parts at intended deformation sites in your voxel editor and then rejoining them in your DCC after cleaning - but these are not ideal.

For this process to be optimal would require changes to the way that voxel editors export meshes for use in game engines - perhaps the creation of a specially-designed export preset.  Such preset would perform the triangle reduction, normal correction and no non-manifold geometry checks - currently done in the DCC - instead at export time, but in addition would provide some way to mark particular parts of the model as sites intended for deformation, and at those sites, retain additional vertices to enable clean deformation - for instance, by using a special "deforming joint" voxel block that adds loop cuts at several points through one (selectable) axis, each adding 4 additional vertices for deformation.